Add specific patch instructions for Jinja (#950)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S5131/python/jinja/rule.adoc

== How to fix it?

> The following code is vulnerable to XSS because Jinja autoescaping of special HTML charactrer as been disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code is vulnerable to XSS because Jinja auto escaping of special HTML characters has been disabled.
```

[source,python]
----
from flask import render_template

@app.route('/hello/<name>')
def hello(name=None):
    hello = f"<h1>Hello { name }</h1>"
    return render_template('hello.html', hello=hello)
----

[source,html]
----
<!doctype html>
{% autoescape false %} 
{{ hello }} <!-- Noncompliant -->
{% endautoescape %}
----

> One option is to move the dynamic HTML content to the template engine and stop disableing autoescape.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One option is to move the dynamic HTML content to the template engine and stop disabling auto escape.
```

> One option is to move the dynamic HTML content to the template engine and stop disabling auto escaping.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One option is to move the dynamic HTML content to the template engine and stop disabling auto-escaping.
```

[[source,python]
----
from flask import render_template

@app.route('/hello/<name>')
def hello(name=None):
    return render_template('hello.html', name=name)
----
[source,html]
----
<!doctype html>
<h1>Hello {{ name }}</h1>
----

> Qnother option is to use ``++jinja2.escape++`` or ``++html.escape++`` to sanitize untruted value before using them in the dynamicly generated HTML string

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another option is to use ``++jinja2.escape++`` or ``++html.escape++`` to sanitize untrusted value before using them in the dynamicaly generated HTML string
```
You need a new keyboard bro 😄

[[source,python]
----
from flask import render_template
import html

@app.route('/hello/<name>')
def hello(name=None):
    hello = f"<h1>Hello { html.escape(name) }</h1>"

>     return render_template('hello.html', hello=hello)

Reviewer 2: I am unsure if we should really recommend this. It is secure in this case, but it is a bad practice for multiple reasons. For example, if the wrong filter is applied in the template (`{{ hello|foo }}`) it might become vulnerable again, it breaks the separation of view and controller, and it makes the code more unmaintainable in general.

----

[source,html]
----
<!doctype html>
{% autoescape false %} 
{{ hello }}
{% endautoescape %}
----

=== How does this work?

> Template engines are used by web application to build HTML content. Template files contains static HTML as well as template language instruction. These instruction allow for example to insert dynamic values in the document as template is rendered. Template engine can autoescape HTML special characters from dynamic value in order to prevent XSS vulnerabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Template engines are used by web applications to build HTML content. Template files contain static HTML as well as template language instruction. These instructions allow, for example, to insert dynamic values in the document as a template is rendered. Template engines can auto escape HTML special characters of dynamic values in order to prevent XSS vulnerabilities.
```

> Template engines are used by web applications to build HTML content. Template files contain static HTML as well as template language instruction. These instructions allow, for example, to insert dynamic values in the document as the template is rendered. Template engines can auto escape HTML special characters of dynamic values in order to prevent XSS vulnerabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Template engines are used by web applications to build HTML content. Template files contain static HTML as well as template language instruction. These instructions allow, for example, to insert dynamic values in the document as the template is rendered. Template engines can auto-escape HTML special characters of dynamic values in order to prevent XSS vulnerabilities.
```

> In Flask applications, Jinja autoescaping feature is unabled by default. XSS vulnerabilities arise when an untrusted value is injected in the tamplate and that autoescaping is disabled using `{% autoescape false %}`. This is often the case when a piece of dynamic HTML is generated from the Python code and used as a template parameter. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Flask applications, the Jinja auto escaping feature is enabled by default. XSS vulnerabilities arise when an untrusted value is injected in the template and that auto escaping is disabled using `{% autoescape false %}`. This is often the case when a piece of dynamic HTML is generated from the Python code and used as a template parameter. 
```

> In Flask applications, the Jinja auto escaping feature is enabled by default. XSS vulnerabilities arise when an untrusted value is injected in the template and that auto escaping is disabled using `{% autoescape false %}`. This is often the case when a piece of dynamic HTML is generated from the Python code and used as a template parameter. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Flask applications, the Jinja auto-escaping feature is enabled by default. XSS vulnerabilities arise when an untrusted value is injected in the template and that auto-escaping is disabled using `{% autoescape false %}`. This is often the case when a piece of dynamic HTML is generated from the Python code and used as a template parameter. 
```

=== Pitfalls

> Although Jinja autoescaping drastically decreases the chance of introducing Cross-Site Scripting vulnerabilities, there are still specific cases where vulnerabilities can occure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although Jinja auto escaping drastically decreases the chance of introducing Cross-Site Scripting vulnerabilities, there are still specific cases where vulnerabilities can occur.
```

> Although Jinja's auto escaping drastically decreases the chance of introducing Cross-Site Scripting vulnerabilities, there are still specific cases where vulnerabilities can occur.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although Jinja's auto-escaping drastically decreases the chance of introducing Cross-Site Scripting vulnerabilities, there are still specific cases where vulnerabilities can occur.
```

==== Dynamic values inside a script tag

> Auto escaping doesn't prevent XSS when dynamic values are added inside ```++<script>++` tags.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Auto-escaping doesn't prevent XSS when dynamic values are added inside ```++<script>++` tags.
```

> In the following example, if ``++name++`` is not untrusted, JavaScript code can be injected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the following example, if ``++name++`` is untrusted, JavaScript code can be injected.
```

I guess that was the intention? Maybe "user-controlled" would fit even better.

[source,html]
----
<!doctype html>
<script> var name = {{ name }}</script>
----

> In this case dynamic data should be retrived asynchronously form the JavaScript code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, dynamic data should be retrieved asynchronously from the JavaScript code.
```

> In this case, dynamic data should be retrieved asynchronously from the JavaScript code.

Reviewer 2: Both approaches are safe, though retrieving the data asynchronously would require a change of the architecture, so quite a lot of work. I am also not sure if the developer would understand what exactly has to be done to fetch the data asynchronously.

`tojson` is easy to do and seems to be safe. My personal most-liked approach is using data attributes outside of the script tag to read out the data inside of the script tag. This way normal HTML-encoding can be used (which is done by default).

Author: > So for example <script data-name="{{ name }}">...</script>.
I saw this alternative, I was not sure how convenient it was. I will mention it.

> Alternatively the ``++tojson++`` filter can be use to insert a data structure in the JavaScript code at render time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, the ``++tojson++`` filter can be used to insert a data structure in the JavaScript code at render time.
```

== How to fix it?

The following code is vulnerable to Cross-Site Scripting because Jinja auto-escaping of special HTML characters has been disabled.

[source,python]
----
from flask import render_template

@app.route('/hello/<name>')
def hello(name=None):
    hello = f"<h1>Hello { name }</h1>"
    return render_template('hello.html', hello=hello)
----

[source,html]
----
<!doctype html>
{% autoescape false %}
{{ hello }} <!-- Noncompliant -->
{% endautoescape %}
----

> Stop disabling auto-escaping by moving the dynamic HTML content to the template engine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable auto-escaping by moving the dynamic HTML content to the template engine.
```

> [[source,python]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[source,python]
```

@app.route('/hello/<name>')
def hello(name=None):
    return render_template('hello.html', name=name)
----
[source,html]
----
<!doctype html>
<h1>Hello {{ name }}</h1>
----

=== How does this work?

Template engines are used by web applications to build HTML content. Template files contain static HTML as well as template language instruction. These instructions allow, for example, to insert dynamic values (variables) in the document as the template is rendered. Template engines can auto escape HTML special characters of variables in order to prevent XSS vulnerabilities.

In Flask applications, the Jinja auto-escaping feature is enabled by default. XSS vulnerabilities arise when an untrusted value is injected in the template and that auto-escaping is disabled using ``++{% autoescape false %}++`` or ``++|safe++`` filter. This is often the case when a piece of dynamic HTML is generated from the Python code and used in a template variable.

=== Pitfalls

Although Jinja's auto-escaping drastically decreases the chance of introducing Cross-Site Scripting vulnerabilities, there are still specific cases where vulnerabilities can occur.

==== Unquoted variables in attributes

> If ``++color++`` is untrusted, JavaScript code can be injected by adding event-handler attributes like ``++onload++``.

Reviewer 2: Minor: The example uses `<span>` which does not have the `onload` event handler. Maybe it makes more sense to use `<img>` instead.

Author: Good catch. I will mention "onmouse" instead

[source,html]
----
<!doctype html>
<span style={{color}}>...</span>
----

> Surround the attribute with double or single quotes to prevent arbitrary HTML tags from being added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Surround the attribute with double or single quotes to prevent arbitrary attributes from being added.
```

The auto-encoding still prevents HTML tags from being added.

[source,html]
----
<!doctype html>
<span style="{{color}}">...</span>
----

==== Variables in ``++href++`` attributes

If ``++url++`` is untrusted, JavaScript code can be injected by using an attributes value that starts with ``++javascript:++``.

[source,html]
----
<!doctype html>
<a href="{{url}}">...</a>
----

Use function like ``++flask.url_for++`` to generate URLs used in ``++href++`` attributes

[source,html]
----
<!doctype html>
<a href="{{ url_for('index') }}">...</a>
----

> ==== Variables in a script blocks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Variables in script blocks
```

If ``++name++`` is untrusted, JavaScript code can be injected.

[source,html]
----
<!doctype html>

> <script> var name = {{ name }}</script>

Reviewer 2: I haven't tested it but shouldn't it be with quotes?

```suggestion
<script> var name = '{{ name }}';</script>
```
